Press release

 

The World Conference of Associations of Theological Institutions
(WOCATI) helds its fourth world congress from 31st May until 7th of June
in Thessaloniki, Greece.  WOCATI was inaugurated in a global conference
in June 1989 in Yogyakarta, Indonesia in cooperation with the ETE
programme of WCC. The world forum of associations and accrediting
organizations of theological schools from all over the world will
discuss key issues of the future of ecumenical theological education in
the 21st century under the theme “Theological Education – A Radical
Reappraisal”. Organized by the president of WOCATI, Prof. Petros
Vassiliadis from Theological Faculty of Thessaloniki, and the Programme
on Ecumenical Theological Education of WCC in Geneva (Dr. Dietrich
Werner) the congress will bring together more then 50 participants from
Asia, Africa, Pacific, Caribbean, Europe, Latin America and the US. For
the first time also the Chinese Christian Council is represented. Key
speakers for the congress will be (Prof. Dr. Ulrich Duchrow, University
of Heidelberg; Prof. Dr. Isabel Phiri, University of KwaZulu Natal,
Pietermaritzburg South Africa, Prof. Dr. Huan Po Ho, Chan Jung Christian
University Tainan and Prof. Ioan Sauca, Ecumenical Institute of Bossey).
During the conference also the 50th anniversary of the programme on
Ecumenical Theological Education of the WCC which was founded as
Theological Education Fund (TEF) at the world missions conference of the
International Missionary Council in Accra, Ghana 1957/1958 will be
commemorated. Several former staff members like Prof. Dr. Ross Kinsler
and Prof. Dr. John Pobee will address the conference at this occasion.
The WCC will be presented also by one of its Presidents, Prof. Ofelia
Ortega from Matanzas Theological Seminary in Cuba. The conference is
expected to set new priorities for international cooperation and
dialogue for ecumenical theological education, for promoting funding in
theological education as well as for WOCATI as an umbrella organization.
The conference is also seen as a strategic contribution for the
Edinburgh 2010 process which in one of its focal areas aims at bringing
together new perspectives for theological education in the 21st century.
More information on WCC and WOCATI websites.

 

